---
layout: post
author: Jim Tunnessen
title:  "Digital Government"
date:   2014-01-23 18:39:00
categories: Digital Strategy
permalink: digital_government
tags: IT, digital, government, innovation, federal, collaboration, responsive web design, enterprise architecture, cloud computing, digital government strategy, digital services, mobile development, agile development
published: true
---

Welcome to the 21st century. Now, as a government, how do we communicate with, well, everyone? Technology is advancing at an exponential rate, shortening the relevance of most information systems. People are not communicating in the same manner any more. Mailing a letter is about as effective as Morse code and email is falling into the same boat. Social media sites garner most of the public’s methods of communication through direct messages and news feeds. The public is connected all the time using the public’s unified communication platform Google. Yet, when a citizen reaches out to the government we ask for handwritten documentation, when they speak to us on the phone no one is keeping a record of this conversation in a single repository for others to reference the next time this person calls, and government employees cannot connect to their systems at anytime via their mobile device because they do not have government mobile applications or the device they carry is about as effective as carrying a brick. On May 23, 2012 the Federal Government published the Digital Government: Building a 21st Century Platform to Better Serve the American People in order to provide a smart, affordable direction for advancing the government’s technological platform to not only meet the “anytime, anywhere” digital needs of the public, but also to spur innovation across the Nation. 

### Overview of the Digital Government Strategy ###

The digital strategy consists of four principles: 1) providing an “information-centric” approach, 2) operating on a “shared platform”, 3) using a “customer-centric” approach, 4) ensuring “security and privacy” are accounted for with all digital services (Digital Government, p. 5). Used correctly, these four principles will allow agencies to transform their the processes and responsiveness of their workforce. 

According to Chapter 26 of US Code 44, “electronic government” should enhance the access and delivery of Government information and services to the public, other agencies, and other Government entities; or bring about improvements in Government operations. The Government’s Digital Strategy approaches the requirement of enhancing the access and delivery of Government information and services by applying the information-centric approach of the aforementioned four principles.  Being information-centric decouples the information from the presentation layer and keeps the content in a single repository allowing for a single update to the information to be pushed out across numerous applications on varying devices (Digital Government, p. 10). The Government’s digital strategy also encourages the use of APIs in order for the information to not only update Government sponsored applications, but also other applications that may be using the Government’s data.  

As noted in Part A of the digital strategy document, over the past many years, the government has created numerous duplicate applications and websites in order to reach the customer in different formats via desktop or mobile device, internal or external customer. Shared platform follows the principle of “build once, use may times” (Digital Government, p. 13). Information technology leaders should vet their business requests against other applications that they may already have internally or that other agencies may already be using. Following the Ruby programming principles of DRY (Do not Repeat Yourself) the government should do everything necessary to keep from reinventing the wheel. The proposed support strategy for sticking to the shared platform requires focus on these three initial actions: Identify shared and open content management system solutions; help agencies develop web APIs; and launch a shared mobile application development program. This requires agencies to foster the sharing policies and best practices (Digital Government, p. 14) and applies to the procurement of information systems. An enterprise approach to procurement can leverage the economies of scale, streamline the purchasing of systems, and keep from redundant inner-agency purchases (Digital Government, p. 16).	

The previous two principles reinforce the Government’s drive to become customer-centric. It is encouraged to use modern tools and technologies to provide service to the customers. Responsive web design is one of the technological tools identified to aid in this process by developing websites and applications that may be used across various devices. Natural language, standards for structuring and tagging content, common code libraries, frameworks, and content management systems are other methods to provide customer-centric development (Digital Government, p. 20).

Security and privacy are always a concern for the government. Highly sensitive information is maintained within each agency. A data breach has the potential to being much more damaging than someone hacking a company’s credit card roster. However, with all the devices that maintain Government data such as laptops, desk tops, tablets, smartphones would it not be better to house the data in the cloud and have it accessible via each device. Then information would not be maintained on the device itself, allowing for less worry when a device is stolen or misplaced. That being said the Federal Government will need to ensure that there are safeguards in place to protect entry to the data from these devices.

### Analysis of the Digital Government Strategy ###

This is certainly the correct direction for the Government to take. It is unfortunate that it has taken so long to get here, but it is commendable to now have such a plan in place. The government should be on the forefront of technology. As it is noted in the Digital Strategy, the Government should, “unlock the power of government data to spur innovation across our Nation to improve the quality of services for the American people” (Digital Government, p.2). This can be done through internal policy changes. Public code repositories like Github where code can be reviewed and changed by anyone and APIs to government data can open up a whole new streamlined and effective digital government. This is how the IT works outside of the government. It is imperative for government CIOs to understand how the internal and external users of their systems operate. This allows for the systems to be built meeting their needs. Gone is the day when you could spend years building an application, release it, and tell the customer that application meets their needs. People will not stand for it, neither as workers in the government or as customers of the government. 
Unfortunately, it is not uncommon to see multiple versions of the same application within a single agency. These duplicitous applications can be a COTS products or the result of in-house development. There needs to be an agency wide vetting process to ensure that the same application is not being purchased over again for another subsection of the agency or that we are not building the same thing that we already have for another business line. By not having these processes in place wastes tax payers money and government employee’s time that could be used addressing other issues. Key factor to operating off of shared platform and creating the culture of vigilance and not repeating development, build once.

### Conclusion ###

The principles of the Government’s Digital Strategy are sound. They provide a strong base and understanding for how government agencies should be working together with each other and the customers to harness the technological power that is available to all. Just like any business, the Federal Government must stay abreast of the technological developments. Being customer-centric, information-centric, working from a shared platform, and maintaining a strong security and privacy policy will allow the government to start moving in the right direction and allow users to innovate and create a more effective government.

### Bibliography ####

"44 U.S. Code Â§ 3601 - Definitions." LII / Legal Information Institute. N.p., n.d. Web. 23 Jan. 2014.
Digital Government Building a 21st Century Platform to Better Serve the American People. Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President, 2012. Print.
